feat: add grpc health checking (#4779)
jina-ai/jina: docs/fundamentals/health-check.md

# Health and readiness check of Jina Services

> 

Author: this comes from the `document` of GRPC linked there

}
```

(health-check-gateway)=
## Health check of the Gateway

The same way individual Executors expose endpoints for orchestrators, clients or other services to check their availability, Gateway, as a microservice, also exposes this in different ways depending on the protocol used.

### Gateway health check with grpc

When using grpc as the protocol to communicate with the Gateway, then Gateway uses the exact same mechanism as Executors to expose their individual health status. It exposes [grpc health check](https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/master/doc/health-checking.md) to the outside world.

With the same Flow described before we can use the same way to check the gateway status:

```bash
docker run --network='host' fullstorydev/grpcurl -plaintext 127.0.0.1:12345 grpc.health.v1.Health/Check
```

```text
{
  "status": "SERVING"
}
```

### Gateway health check with http or websocket

When using grpc or http as a procotol for the Gateway, then it exposes and endpoint '/' that one can query to check the status.

By having a Flow with http or websocket as protocol:

```python
from jina import Flow

f = Flow(protocol='http', port=12345).add()
with f:
    f.block()
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, you can query the "empty" endpoint:
```

```bash
curl http://localhost:12345
```

Then you will get a valid empty response indicating its ability to serve.
```text
{}%
```

## Readiness of a Flow exposed to the client

A lot of times, from the client perspective, it is useful to know if a Flow, as a complete set of microservices, is ready to receive requests. This is why the gateway 
exposes an endpoint for each of the supported protocols to know the health and readiness of a Flow. 

> Also Jina Flow and Client contains a convenient API to query these endpoints. You can call `flow.dry_run()` and `client.dry_run()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jina `Flow` and `Client` offer a convenient API to query these readiness endpoints. You can call `flow.dry_run()` and `client.dry_run()`, which will return `True` if the Flow is healthy and ready, and `False` otherwise.
```
